# Using simple integrated assessment models ot explore human and earth system feedbacks.

###### tags: `GEO9550`
**Date:** *Oslo joint seminar May 24th 2023*

**Speaker:** *Sibel Eker, Radboud University*


Integrated assessment models (IAM) are models that simulate the whole land-
economy-climate system using socio-economic assumptions to produce energy, 
land use, and emissions scenarios. The complexity of the task at hand often 
leads to models of high complexity, like the models underpinning the IPCC 
assessments and scenarios.

However, a disadvantage of the big complex IAMs is that they are 
computationally exhaustive, which means that we cannot explore the 
uncertainty space to the same degree. In addition, the large complexity makes 
the model difficult to understand for both stakeholders and scientists.

Therefore, in recent years, there has been increasing interest in developing 
simplified and interpretable IAMs. The simple models can explore the 
uncertainties since they have low computational cost. The low computational 
cost also enables more stakeholder engagement since results can be explored 
interactively as policy solutions are explored.

The FeliX model is such a simplified model. The model consists of eight 
sectors: economy, energy, carbon cycle, climate, biodiversity, water, 
population, and land use. Land use and dietary changes. The model is built on 
the principles of system thinking, where populations in different groups are 
represented by stocks, and populations can flow between stocks. Multiple 
stocks can be connected by multiple flows, creating feedback loops.

One example of such feedback mechanisms is studying dietary change; Land is 
used to create food, and food demand is controlled by the population. Growth 
in populations creates pressure to use more fertilizer or create more arable 
land through deforestation. Crop yield and agriculture give the total food 
supply. GDP is the main driver of food demand.

The model shows that we achieve the greatest effect when a large portion of 
the population follows a healthy diet, with only some meat, rather than a 
small part of the population following a vegan diet. The most influential 
parameter for dietary shift in the model is changes in social norms.
